Blog: SIM Swapping Is Hijacking Your User Accounts: How to Shut It Down (#379)
supertokens/blog: content/sim-swapping/index.md

---
title: "SIM Swapping Is Hijacking Your User Accounts: How to Shut It Down"
date: "2025-02-15"
description: "Learn about SIM swapping scams, their impact on personal security, and effective strategies to safeguard your mobile identity."
cover: "sim-swapping.png"
category: "featured"
author: "Maria Shimkovska"
---

Let's play a game. 🎯

What do Twitter founder Jack Dorsey and actress Chloe Moretz have in common? 

...

Yep. Both were victims of a cyber attack called a **SIM swapping**. 😬

> From spamming to phishing scams and identity theft, cybercriminals sure know how to keep themselves busy. But the one scam they just can't seem to get enough of right now is in fact **SIM swapping** &mdash; a sneaky trick where they hijack your SIM card and take over your phone number. So any calls or texts you receive go to them, not to you. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From spamming to phishing scams and identity theft, cybercriminals sure know how to keep themselves busy. But the one scam they just can't seem to get enough of right now is **SIM swapping** &mdash; a sneaky trick where they hijack your SIM card and take over your phone number. So any calls or texts you receive go to them, not to you. 
```

After all, scammers don’t just hack your phone &mdash; they pose as you to fool your mobile provider and gain access to your most important accounts. Incredibly rude if you ask me. 😑

Time to spot the faker and kick them to the curb.

```toc
tight: true
toHeading: 3
```

## What is a SIM Card? 
A **SIM (Subscriber Identity Module)** is a small card that **connects your phone to your mobile network**. 📶📲

It holds important details such as your phone number, contacts, and other data. This information allows you to make calls, send texts, and use mobile data. It's removable and transferable to other phones.

Alternatively, **eSIMs are embedded Subscriber Identity Modules** &mdash; SIM cards that are built into a user's phone. 🔒📲

**Because the SIM is tied to your account, moving it to another phone will transfer your mobile services to that device.**

## What is SIM Swapping and Why Should You Care? 

**SIM Swapping** (also referred to as **SIM hijacking** or **port-out fraud**) is a fraud technique where scammers transfer a victim's phone number to a new SIM card under their control. It's a type of account takeover. 
 

> **This allows scammers &mdash; our cybervillains &mdash; to receive communications associated with your phone number, including those that let them to access your social media profiles, banking and other accounts.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**This allows scammers &mdash; our cybervillains &mdash; to receive communications associated with your phone number, including those that let them to access your social media profiles, banking, and other accounts.**
```

Cybervillains may target people who have valuable social media or financial accounts. This is how Jack Dorsey, the founder of Twitter (now X), [**got his account hacked in 2019**](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/09/05/technology/sim-swap-jack-dorsey-hack.html). 

## How SIM Swapping Works
SIM swapping attacks can be summed up in three main steps:

1. **The attacker will gather information about the victim**. This information is then used in verifying a person's identity and an attacker can use it to impersonate the victim. They could find personal details from: 

> - social media accounts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Social media accounts
```

> - data leaks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Data leaks
```

> - any other place where a victim's data is freely shared

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- anywhere a victim's data is freely shared
```
You might give a specific example here. I assume you mean hacked info available on the dark web, but maybe you mean websites like "yellow pages" which list personal information?

> - they could also try to get information from a victim through phishing and other social engineering tactics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Phishing and other social engineering tactics
```

> 2. **The attacker will then reach out to the victim's phone company pretending to be the victim.** They can use any information they gathered to answer security questions &mdash; which is why some people also question the safety of personal questions as a security measure. Then they will ask to have the victim's phone number transferred to a SIM card they control. Once the carrier processes the request, the victim's phone will lose service. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **The attacker will then reach out to the victim's phone company pretending to be the victim.** They can use the information they gathered to answer security questions &mdash; and this is why some people also question the safety of personal questions as a security measure. Then, they will ask to have the victim's phone number transferred to a SIM card they control. Once the carrier processes the request, the victim's phone will lose service. 
```

3. **After all this, the attacker will now have access to the victim's text messages and contacts.** This could also lead to even more attacks because once they have this information, attackers can get even more information on users, including passwords and emails &mdash; and any **Two-Factor Authentication codes**. 

![A chart showing how SIM swapping works generally](sc.png)

## Consequences of SIM Swap Attacks
If someone takes control of your phone number, they could **steal money from your bank account**, **make unauthorized payments**, or **apply for loans in your name**. They might also **access your personal information** through email or social media, leading to **identity theft** or even legal trouble if your identity is misused. By changing passwords, the attacker could **lock you out** of important accounts, potentially causing **permanent data loss**. On top of that, they could **invade your privacy by reading your messages**, listening to voicemails, or **impersonating you in calls and texts**.

> ## 3 Signs That You Are The Victim of a SIM Swap Attack

Reviewer: Normally I would say that "3" should be spelled out, but I'm not sure if this is a stylistic thing because this is a list. Could you let me know? If this isn't intentional for style, then please spell out "3".

> ## 3 Signs That You Are The Victim of a SIM Swap Attack

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 3 Signs That You Are the Victim of a SIM Swap Attack
```

Normally I would say that "3" should be spelled out, but I'm not sure if this is a stylistic thing because this is a list. Could you let me know? If this isn't intentional for style, then please spell out "3".

Author: This is a choice because it's easier to scan, like when you are going over the section titles. And like you mentioned because it's a list. I was thinking about it being like a mini listicle inside the article.

> Keeping in mind some of these signs can help you catch a SIM swap attack early so the damage either doesn't happen or at least isn't extensive:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recognizing the signs of an attack can help you catch a SIM swap attack early, and help you mitigate the damage:
```
This might be a little more formal, but I do think we can tighten this up.

> 1. **You can't make calls or send texts** &mdash; This can be a sign of a cellular provider outage but it can also be a SIM swap attack in the process. It's always better to check for outages if this happens and then act accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **You can't make calls or send texts** &mdash; This can be a sign of a cellular provider outage, but it can also be a SIM swap attack in the process. It's always better to check for outages if this happens and then act accordingly.
```

2. **You're unable to access accounts** &mdash; Attackers most likely know they have limited time to do some damage so they will try to buy more time by changing your accounts' passwords. Changing back your passwords to various accounts will take some time. So this may be a sign that a SIM swap attack has unfortunately happened.

> 3. **You find unauthorized transactions** &mdash; It can either be a mistake or a SIM swap attack. But either way, it's good to get that taken care of and notify your bank and stop the attack from continuing. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **You find unauthorized transactions** &mdash; It can either be a mistake or a SIM swap attack. But either way, it's good to get that taken care of, and notify your bank and stop the attack from continuing. 
```

> As you probably noticed all of those signs are just that &mdash; signs. They could be something else, but it's always beneficial for you and your users to keep them in mind so they don't fall victims to SIM swapping. Or if they do, to minimize the damage. 

Reviewer: I don't think "don't fall victims to SIM swapping" is accurate here. This blog is talking about the signs of SIM swapping, and then later how to protect against it. Or is there information about how to prevent SIM swapping? I'm on my first read-through now, so haven't seen that yet if it's here.

> As you probably noticed all of those signs are just that &mdash; signs. They could be something else, but it's always beneficial for you and your users to keep them in mind so they don't fall victims to SIM swapping. Or if they do, to minimize the damage. 

Reviewer: **IMPORTANT - GLOBAL CHANGES NEEDED**
Starting here, there is a POV shift. This article starts with "you" and now it is "you **and your users**". This needs to be revised to have a transition to "you and your users" -- like "As the head of security for your company, how do you protect your users from this kind of attack?" or something similar. Then, a switch in POV would make more sense -- but it still might be best to rewrite all the "you" references to be generic (eg, "How to know if your phone has been attacked" --> "how to know if a phone has been attacked"). Also, the blog title might need to be updated. "Your User Accounts" sounds personal, so maybe "Your User's Accounts" is better for a professional scenario.

Author: Thanks! This is really important

 

## Are eSIM Cards More Secure Than Physical SIM Cards? 🤔

> Many people question whether eSIMs are more secure than physical SIM cards, but it's not a straightforward answer. That being said, eSIMs do offer an advantage in case you lose your phone, as they can be quickly disabled &mdash; [**especially if you are traveling**](https://support.apple.com/en-us/118227#:~:text=eSIM%20is%20more%20secure%20than,models%20at%20the%20same%20time.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many people question whether eSIMs are more secure than physical SIM cards, but it's not a straightforward answer. eSIMs do offer an advantage in case you lose your phone, as they can be quickly disabled &mdash; [**especially if you are traveling**](https://support.apple.com/en-us/118227#:~:text=eSIM%20is%20more%20secure%20than,models%20at%20the%20same%20time.).
```
Is there a more generic link to use? That's specific to iPhones, and people have a variety of phones.

Author: I will look and see to it to replace it with a more generic one :)

In a **traditional SIM attack**, an attacker would need physical access to your phone to steal your SIM card and insert it into their own device.

> With **eSIMs**, there’s no physical card to steal, which adds some security. However, scammers can still perform a **SIM swapping attack** by convincing your mobile carrier to transfer your number to their device &mdash; and with the rise of social engineering *(especially enhanced by AI)*, impersonating people has become easier than ever.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With **eSIMs**, there’s no physical card to steal. However, scammers can still perform a **SIM swapping attack** by convincing your mobile carrier to transfer your number to their device &mdash; and with the rise of social engineering *(especially enhanced by AI)*, impersonating people has become easier than ever.
```

> At the end of the day, neither eSIMs nor physical SIMs are automatically more secure. The key to protecting yourself and your users lies in the security measures you take &mdash; like enabling **two-factor authentication that do not rely on SMS**, using **strong passwords**, and being cautious with what information is shared online.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the end of the day, neither eSIMs nor physical SIMs are automatically more secure. The key to protecting yourself and your users lies in the security measures you take &mdash; like enabling **two-factor authentication that does not rely on SMS**, using **strong passwords**, and being cautious with what information is shared online.
```

## Are SIM Swapping Attacks on the Rise? 

> Yes, experts claim that these attacks are not only on the rise, but are also becoming more sophisticated. Which is not surprising &mdash; especially with the growth of AI. 

Reviewer: Here, I think it would be good to be specific about what "growth of AI" means. Do you mean hackers are using AI to...{something? find information? create software code designed to attack devices?}? It's mentioned earlier, briefly, about social engineering via AI, but that could be expanded on. Like what exactly do users need to be aware of (eg bot FB accounts -- and how they shouldn't accept friend requests from people they don't know).

Author: Another good point!

> [**The Federal Bureau of Investigation issued an announcement**](https://www.ic3.gov/PSA/2022/PSA220208) in 2022 to inform the public and mobile carriers of the rise of these attacks. They said that they received 320 complaints related to SIM swapping attacks between January 2018 and December 2020 , and that number jumped to 1,611 in just 2021 &mdash; although many believe these numbers are underestimated because a lot of identity thefts are not reported. 

Reviewer: This is conflating a SIM swap attack and identity theft. A SIM swap *could* result in identity theft, but isn't a SIM swap mostly to steal money via money apps and bank accounts? Like for identity theft, the hacker would need a social security number, or the equivalent in non-US countries.

##  Why SMS 2FA Is No Longer Enough

SIM swapping essentially renders SMS-based authentication useless for protecting sensitive data. But it goes beyond SIM swapping. SMS-based authentication is only as secure as our SMS system is, which is pretty vulnerable. 

### The Weaknesses of SMS-Based Authentication

> - **Vulnerable to malware:** [**According to Ashish Malhotra**](https://securityintelligence.com/whats-wrong-with-sms-authentication-two-ibm-experts-weigh-in-on-the-nist-recommendation/) &mdash; an IBM authentication expert &mdash; many phones are susceptible to malware, where users unwittingly download malware that monitors their text messages, including any OTPs (One Time Passwords/Passcodes) which are used in 2FA. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Vulnerable to malware:** [**According to Ashish Malhotra**](https://securityintelligence.com/whats-wrong-with-sms-authentication-two-ibm-experts-weigh-in-on-the-nist-recommendation/) &mdash; an IBM authentication expert &mdash; many phones are susceptible to malware, where users unwittingly download malware that monitors their text messages, including any OTPs (One Time Passwords) that are used in 2FA. 
```

##  The Right Authentication Strategy: Moving Beyond SMS 2FA

Implement these three pillars to make sure you and your users are safe.

#### Pillar 1 &mdash; Implement Stronger Two-Factor Authentication (2FA) Alternatives
- **FIDO2/WebAuthn Authentication**: Device-based authentication eliminates reliance on SMS.
- **TOTP (Time-Based One-Time Passwords) with an Authenticator App**:
- Apps like **Google Authenticator** and **Authy** remove carrier dependence.
- Attackers need physical access to the user’s device to generate 2FA codes.

#### Pillar 2 &mdash; Require Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA) for High-Risk Actions
- Enforce **MFA for sensitive transactions** (password changes, fund transfers, adding new devices).
- Use **risk-based authentication** to prompt extra verification only when login behavior seems suspicious.

#### Pillar 3 &mdash; Implement Robust Session Management
- **Limit session lifetimes**: Prevent long-lived sessions from being exploited.
- **Auto-log out users when a phone number or device change is detected**.
- **Use SuperTokens to handle secure, scalable session management.**

## How SuperTokens Helps Secure Authentication Against SIM Swapping

> Not everything is grim though. It's just important to know the dangers of SMS-based authentication to prevent any major consequences of SIM swapping attacks for you and your users. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not everything is grim! It's important to know the dangers of SMS-based authentication, to minimize major consequences of SIM swapping attacks for you and your users. 
```

> **If you are ready to take action against it and make your business more secure, here is how SuperTokens is ready to help.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**If you are ready to take action and make your business more secure, here is how SuperTokens is ready to help.**
```

### SuperTokens Secure Authentication Alternatives
1. **Passwordless Authentication:** Magic links and biometric authentication eliminate SMS-based risks.
2. **Adaptive MFA:** Risk-based authentication detects abnormal login patterns and adds an extra verification layer.
3. **Session Hijack Detection:** If a SIM swap occurs, SuperTokens detects mismatched device fingerprints and terminates unauthorized sessions.

### Seamless Integration for Scalable CIAM Security

> SuperTokens integrates seamlessly into existing authentication flows without disrupting the user experience. Its API-first architecture ensures compatibility with OAuth 2.0, OpenID Connect, and enterprise SSO solutions, providing flexibility for various authentication needs. Additionally, SuperTokens offers a lower-cost alternative to proprietary CIAM solutions while allowing full customization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SuperTokens integrates seamlessly into existing authentication flows, without disrupting the user experience. Its API-first architecture ensures compatibility with OAuth 2.0, OpenID Connect, and enterprise SSO solutions provides flexibility for various authentication needs. Additionally, SuperTokens offers a lower-cost alternative to proprietary CIAM solutions, while allowing full customization.
```

> SuperTokens integrates seamlessly into existing authentication flows without disrupting the user experience. Its API-first architecture ensures compatibility with OAuth 2.0, OpenID Connect, and enterprise SSO solutions, providing flexibility for various authentication needs. Additionally, SuperTokens offers a lower-cost alternative to proprietary CIAM solutions while allowing full customization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SuperTokens integrates seamlessly into existing authentication flows, without disrupting the user experience. Its API-first architecture ensures compatibility with OAuth 2.0, OpenID Connect, and enterprise SSO solutions, providing flexibility for various authentication needs. Additionally, SuperTokens offers a lower-cost alternative to proprietary CIAM solutions while allowing full customization.
```
